1. Introduction:
name: -Satyendra Prakash
IIT Roorkee 
chemical engineering (2025)

The messaging service prototype is designed to facilitate real-time communication between users through text messages. It includes user registration, authentication, one-on-one messaging, group chat functionality, and real-time message updates.
2. System Overview:

The system comprises a frontend and a backend, allowing users to register, authenticate, and send/receive messages. Real-time updates are facilitated via WebSockets.
3. System Architecture:

Frontend: React.js, Chakra UI
Backend: Node.js, Express.js
Database: MongoDB (NoSQL)
WebSockets: Socket.io

Chakra UI is utilized in this project for its ease of use, accessibility, and customizability. It accelerates UI development, promotes consistency, and offers a strong community support, crucial for building an intuitive and accessible user interface in a messaging service.
4. Data Flow Diagram:

User Registration & Authentication:

Users interact with the React frontend.
Authentication requests are sent to the Node.js backend.
User data is stored in MongoDB.
Messaging & Group Chat:

Users exchange messages through the React frontend.
Real-time updates are managed via WebSocket connections.
Messages are stored in MongoDB.


Install dependencies

  npm install
  cd frontend/
  npm install
Start the server

  npm run start
Start the Client

  //open now terminal
  cd frontend
  npm start
5. Technology Stack:

Frontend:

React.js: A popular JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
Chakra UI: A component library for designing accessible and customizable UIs.
Backend:

Node.js: A runtime for executing JavaScript on the server.
Express.js: A web application framework for Node.js.
Database:

MongoDB (NoSQL): Chosen for its flexibility, scalability, and JSON-like document storage.
WebSockets:

Socket.io: A library for enabling real-time, bidirectional communication.
6. System Components:

Frontend:

React.js: Responsible for the user interface, user registration, and message interaction.
Chakra UI: Provides the design system, components, and UI elements.
Backend:

Node.js: Manages the server and APIs for user authentication and message handling.
Express.js: Facilitates route handling and middleware integration.
MongoDB: Stores user data and messages in a NoSQL database.
Socket.io: Enables real-time communication and message updates.
7. Security and Privacy:

Authentication:

User registration is secured via bcrypt hashing and token-based authentication (JWT).
Passwords are never stored in plain text.
Privacy:

User data is protected, and privacy is maintained through authentication and authorization controls.
8. Scalability and Performance:

The system can be horizontally scaled by adding more backend servers and utilizing MongoDB's sharding capabilities.
Real-time messaging is optimized for performance through WebSockets.
9. Dependencies and Libraries:

Explain the purpose of key dependencies and libraries, e.g.:
express: Used to build the RESTful API.
mongoose: ODM library for MongoDB interaction.
socket.io: Facilitates real-time messaging.
10. Deployment and Infrastructure:

Deployment is done on github
Infrastructure needs include virtual machines, databases, and WebSocket support.
11. System Testing:

Testing encompasses unit tests for backend components, integration tests for API endpoints, and user acceptance tests for the frontend.
12. Prototyping Setup and Usage Documentation:

Detailed instructions for setting up the prototype, including:
Prerequisites
Installation
Configuration
Database setup
Running the prototype
Usage guide
Troubleshooting
13. Conclusion:

The messaging service prototype provides a clean and intuitive interface for real-time communication, using a robust technology stack and best practices. The system design ensures scalability, security, and optimal performance. Detailed documentation allows for easy setup and usage.
